Hi, I'm Kirill and I want to tell a few stories about the dm package and show recent developments.
In a nutshell, dm helps when you have multiple tables in R. Some call this a relational data
model. So we had computers for sale in the 50s, we started to think about databases in
the 60s, 1970, Edgar Kot published a relational model and this is way before I was born and
still in use today. An example, the points at the right are energy consumers in Switzerland
stored in rows in the table at the left and there is a lot of detail in all those related
tables and this looks scary. With our client, we wanted to build a Shiny app that allows
filtering across all those related tables. This shows the Shiny app in action. All we
had back then was a tool to visualize the relationships. We did not have tools that
made the task less scary, so we went ahead, we implemented a routine that did all those
joins and filters in like 800 lines of code. It worked, but it was tedious, it was difficult
to maintain, it was error-prone and we thought we can do better than that and that's how
dm was born. With the dm package, the filtering logic was reduced to a variant of this. So
from 800 down to 6 and the best thing is if the data model changes, the code stays the
same. I call it a success. Others call it a success too. Amazing. It's a treasure, it's
a lifesaver. Thanks, Gary. Thanks, Hadley. Thanks, Niels. Thanks to everybody who filed
issues who contributed code to the dm package. You are awesome. Best thing is we are on CRAN
in version 1. Our universe in GitHub as well. So if you want the latest and greatest, you
may want to go to our universe. If you don't want to mess up your local installation, click
this pause it cloud button. This gives you, well, should I say our studio cloud? IDE in
your browser with everything installed so you can just test. So there is no excuse to
not try today. Some people are wary about dependencies. We are not among those people.
So in fact, dm wouldn't have been possible without all those great packages we depend
upon, without iGraph, without everything. Thanks. This is us. And I always wanted to
bring this, but I'm repurposing this today. So we're talking about multiple tables. So
which of these tools has a concept of an active dataset, right? You start a program, you open
a file and this is your dataset and you work with it. One car, one dataset. Many cars,
many datasets. In R we don't have the active dataset. That's a good thing. Took me a while
to realize there's a difference between data for analysis and data cleaning, data management.
So for analysis, all we really want is tidy data. Rows, columns, cells with atomic values,
everything lined up cleanly, ready to put into our model, except there is duplication
in those highlighted parts at left. And we can't have that for data management, we can't
have that for data cleaning. This leads to problems further down the road. So if we try
a different approach, wide form, this is better. There is no duplication, except that those
beautiful column names make me want to turn this into long form the first time I see it.
So we want multiple tables, we need often multiple tables, and we want DM, because that's
what DM is doing. If you have more than one table, DM makes your life easier. We are in
a database session, so many of you will know about primary keys and foreign keys. This
is just to make sure we're all on the same page, very briefly. The dataset we saw in
the previous slides could be decomposed into two tables, measurements at the left, entities
at the right. So multiple measurements correspond to a single entity. The entities have a primary
key, the ID column. The measurements have a foreign key, also in the ID column, linked
to the entities, and in fact this is what a DM object contains. Tables, this could be
local data frames, or lazy tables on the database with a DB plier package. Maybe arrow also
works, but I'm not sure we need it. More on that on the last slide. We have primary
keys, ID, and we have foreign keys that link tables together. That's a DM object, but do
we really need a new package? For two tables? For five tables? Even for ten tables? Will
it actually make your life easier? Will it integrate into your existing workflows? Will
it help you in your work? And I believe the answer is yes, yes, yes, and I'll show you
how. So this is a very new thing, a shiny app we have built, and the team at Sunkra
helped a lot with that, so thanks here for all the support I got when preparing this.
This is the AdventureWorks dataset, if you're familiar with that, and that's the shiny action.
So if we start from the database, we can, with pointing and clicking, select the tables
we care about, we can create code that we can run immediately, we can store it in an
R script, we can put this into a function, so David here will talk more about how to
turn this into a real R package, but for us, this kind of works. So you run this shiny
app once, this is pretty much like the RStudio IDE import assistant. It will give you code
that you can reuse. This is just a summary. So selecting tables gives you code which you
can copy to your console at once. For the data frames use case, when you start with
data frames, data frames don't know about primary or foreign keys, they have just rows
and columns. So we have to teach DM what those keys are, and we can do this as well with
the shiny app. So we're selecting the tables, we're selecting the columns that constitute
the primary keys and the foreign keys, and we get an instant preview in the diagram.
And here we get the code, plus we can also experiment with colors. I find this very helpful
in guiding the eye in a more complex data model. There's an undo function if we mess
up. So if you're satisfied, the copy to console button will give you the code for this data
model from your data frames. So that's new, that's in DM version 1.0.1. And yeah, to sum
up, works for databases, for tables on the database, works for data frames. Try it out.
In our consulting work, we are using DM, well, you saw the expression, whenever we have more
than one table, the DM is just the basic thing that we do. We used it to help with
a shiny app that handles contracts. So this is a situation where we have for a contract
partner in the first stage, contracts at the level of individual countries, and in the
second stage, we would pool contracts together to get an overwatching query for this customer.
And this shows the database UI that we have contributed. We have projects, family, quotes,
and this maps to this data model that we have designed with the DM package and applied to
the database as soon as we're ready, and we could also continuously update it because
the data model is specified in code. So the first stage is everything that's orangish
at the bottom, and what we can do with DM very easily for a specific quote, which we
identify with the primary key, the quote ID, we can get all the related data in one swoop
with the DM package, load it locally, update what we need based on the input from the shiny
app, put it back to the database, so this is create, read, update, delete for you in
shiny made easy with the DM package on a complex data model.
For data analysis, so this is the NWC flight data. We use it throughout the documentation
of the DM package. If we aggregate a flight table, let's say we group by origin, summarize,
compute number of flights per origin airport, or let's say mean arrival delay, what happens
is the result is a table that is conceptually linked with the airport's table. So this group
by summarize creates an implicit foreign key into the airport's table because the data
in the origin column maps to what's been in the airport, and this link is useful if we
want to later bring in details from airports or from other related tables, maybe not shown
here. How does the DM package make it easy to keep
track of your keys? We have a new feature, we call it deconstruct, reconstruct. You can
go from a DM object from a data model to individual tables that still know about their primary
and foreign keys. I'm not going to tell you how, but we can talk about it later. We can
apply data transformations on those separate tables with dplyr or whatever works for you,
and we can put this back into a relational data model as a DM object. A bit of code.
So the new DM deconstruct function. There's nothing except printing code. So from a DM
object that has tables, primary keys and foreign keys, it will give you code that gets you
those separate tables, which you then can compute on. So key equals true is kind of
the key here. The DM constructor on those objects will result in an object that still
has all those primary and foreign keys in place. And this also works when we have analyzed
the data. So here the new table will contribute one primary key, one foreign key. I'm very
excited about this feature. We had a similar concept called zooming before, but this, of
course, doesn't integrate as well with existing workflows. So I think this is a step towards
helping adapt DM to existing codes so that you could benefit from the DM even if you're
not starting on the green field. That's what the resulting DM object looks like. I've had
this before. Why one data model? Why just one data model? We can do more. So this is
an example from another project with another customer. The nodes, the boxes in this diagram
are whole data models. The arrows represent data transformations. This is an ETL process,
transform load, targeting whole data model, data model objects, whole data set going from
data set to data set, giving better guarantees, moving to the right in terms of data quality,
data integrity, and so forth. We don't have a specific framework to do this. This is right
now all custom. This could be a blog post. But we have a pretty good idea how to do this
because there is an inherent chicken and egg problem here. When populating a database,
we first need to create a structure. The tables with the columns and the relationships in
an empty form before we can fill them. And how do you know the structure? So the MP type
function helps us, which gives us the prototype of a DM object, meaning tables and relationships
minus the data, which we then can write to the database and populate. I want to spend
the last few minutes on a new idea that didn't make it into DM1, but that we are also excited
about. Normalized data has been around for ages and will stay around. At the other end
of the spectrum, we have deeply nested data. When you query a web API, typically what you
get is JSON, deeply nested. And somewhere in the middle, we have nested tables. With
the package, think of nest, unnest, pack, unpack. Arrow has great support for this in
their data format. And what we can do in DM today is get from normalized data from
a DM object to nested tables to a single nested table and back. More or less losslessly, more
or less in all cases, we're working on that. But this idea looks very appalling in particular
with the very nice package, which I think is really underrated. We can go from deeply
nested to nested tables in a controlled way. And the way back to JSON is understood. So,
with all those bits and pieces in place, I hope very soon to be able to present a way
to seamlessly move between all those formats, so all of this becomes one. And perhaps nested
tables are a good middle ground, because this would allow us to go back to one single
table. That's just easier than all those boxes and arrows. We are Synchro. The team, as I
said, helped a lot preparing the Shiny app, making sure this all works. Thanks here. We're
very excited to be a sponsor here. If you have detailed questions or would like to chat
or would like to have one of those cheat sheets here, come by. Happy to talk or happy to take
questions here. Thank you.